RSS
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
U.S. Inflation Report Gives Fed Breathing Room on Rates
By JAVIER C. HERNANDEZ
Today, 4:09 PM
The latest government data on Friday reinforced the notion that more drastic efforts to tighten monetary policy were still far off.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

ARTICLE
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
http://www.nytimes.com/2010/02/20/business/economy/20econ.html?partner=rss&emc=rss

While the Federal Reserve has started scaling back emergency measures to support the economy, the latest government data on Friday reinforced a sense that more drastic tightening raising the benchmark interest rate, for instance was still a way off.

A report on consumer prices suggested that inflation was largely in check, despite a period of extraordinarily low interest rates. That should ease some of the pressure on Fed policy makers as they consider when to raise the benchmark rate and take smaller steps to normalize lending.

The cost of living in the United States remained steady in January, the Labor Department said, with the price of a variety of goods everything from medical expenses to cigarettes increasing 0.2 percent. A closely watched measure that excludes volatile food and fuel costs underscored the downward trend: it fell 0.1 percent in January, the first decrease since the end of the recession in 1982.

“Despite the extraordinary fiscal and monetary stimulus injected into the economy, many prices are still stagnant or declining,” Dan Greenhaus, chief economic strategist for Miller Tabak, wrote in a research note on Friday. “The pricing situation still remains fragile.”

There were rumblings about the possibility of deflation a three-month barometer of prices fell to zero last month but economists generally expect the upward momentum to continue. Prices have increased 2.6 percent in the last year.

“Even though the economy is expanding again, the threat of deflation has not passed,” said Paul Ashworth, an economist for Capital Economics in Toronto. He noted that high vacancy rates and a flood of foreclosed homes would continue to push housing costs down.

As it tried to combat the global financial crisis, the Fed printed more than $1 trillion in new money and kept interest rates near zero, heightening concern that inflation could be around the corner.

But so far, prices have remained subdued. That could change as banks begin to lend money they are now holding in reserves, but the Fed hopes tighter monetary policy and efforts to drain some of those reserves will counteract any inflation.

On Thursday, the central bank took a small step toward withdrawing its efforts to prop up the economy, announcing that it would raise the interest rate it charges on short-term loans to banks, known as the discount rate. The critical benchmark rate known as the federal funds rate will probably not rise for at least six months, analysts say.

The Labor Department attributed much of the increase in consumer prices, measured by its Consumer Price Index, to rising energy costs primarily gasoline, fuel oil and natural gas. A decrease in the price of rent, new cars and airline tickets helped offset the rise in energy prices.

Economists said the results indicated that businesses were keeping prices low in an effort to lure price-conscious customers.

“People are very much price-sensitive, they are still paying down their debts, not taking that vacation, not buying that extra item of apparel,” said Anna Piretti, senior economist for BNP Paribas. “That is going to be the theme for some time. Prospects for employment are not looking very bright.”

A report on jobless filings on Thursday rekindled worries that the labor market would be slow to bounce back. First-time unemployment claims last week were much higher than expected 473,000, up 31,000 from the previous week.

The data on consumer prices beat Wall Street forecasts, and helped calm some of the anxiety that had emerged on Wall Street after the Fed said it would raise the discount rate.

On Thursday, the government offered a similar portrait in its report on producer prices, which rose 1.4 percent in January. There were indications, however, that higher prices might be in the pipeline, especially for metals, food and energy products.

It remains to be seen whether businesses can afford to pass their rising costs to consumers. If they do not, that may worsen their own financial health and prolong unemployment.

“If producers see their profits being hurt they will be more reluctant to hire,” Ms. Piretti said. “It’s a circle.”
------------------------------------------------------------------------------