RSS
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Your Money: A Card Fee Still Hides in the Luggage
By RON LIEBER
Today, 4:32 PM
The Credit Card Act is reducing some fees, but the one on foreign transactions, an industry profit center, was not touched.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

ARTICLE
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
http://www.nytimes.com/2010/02/20/your-money/credit-and-debit-cards/20money.html?pagewanted=2&partner=rss&emc=rss

Starting Monday, your credit card company will have to follow a long list of new rules.

Do you pay foreign transaction fees on your cards?
Join the Discussion >>
Because of legislation that President Obama signed last year, your bank won’t be able to charge you a fee for spending more than your credit limit anymore unless you’ve told the company that you want to be able to exceed the limit.

Banks will have to give you at least 45 days notice before raising cash advance and late fees. And any mandatory fees like annual or application fees can’t add up to more than 25 percent of the credit limit, as they often used to with cards that companies aimed at people with poor credit histories.

But here’s one fee that the new law didn’t limit, even though it’s offended scores of consumers for at least a decade and adds up to hundreds of millions of dollars every year for the credit card companies: the dreaded foreign transaction or currency conversion fee.

Most big American banks hit you with these fees of up to 3 percent of every purchase when a merchant processes your credit or debit card purchase outside the United States. International travelers are most affected. But so, too, may be those shopping on the Web from their homes.

Given that the card companies don’t have to do all that much to turn yen and euro transactions into ones denominated in dollars, 3 percent seems a bit rich. So why didn’t the card act put a cap on the fees? One reason is that business travelers and upper middle-class vacationers aren’t a particularly downtrodden class of consumers. And few people lose more than a few hundred dollars to the levy each year.

But here’s the problem. If a few million people each year don’t notice the fees or keep paying them despite their irritation, the card companies go right on charging them. Meanwhile, the banks stand to lose a lot of revenue due to new laws like the Credit Card Act. They’ll want to make it up somewhere, so they may feel emboldened to raise the currency conversion fees further.

So now is as good a time as any to take a closer look at exactly who’s charging the fees, who isn’t and why. Once you do, you’ll probably find the whole thing noxious enough to go just a bit out of your way to avoid paying them.

The fees began with Visa and MasterCard, and even today, they generally charge banks that issue their credit and debit cards a 1 percent fee to perform the actual currency conversions for their transactions. Those banks are free to pass that cost on to customers, and in most cases they do, adding on another fee for good measure.

Today, Chase, Citibank and Bank of America all charge a 3 percent fee, in most instances. American Express tacks on a 2.7 percent fee, though companies that make heavy use of its corporate cards may get a better deal.

Until a few years ago, you’d pay this fee for any purchase that wasn’t denominated in dollars. Then, some middlemen got wise to this and offered to help merchants convert purchases into dollars before running the charge through the credit card networks.

Many American shoppers felt better paying in dollars, but the exchange rate wasn’t particularly good. The merchants got to keep part of that extra markup that travelers paid. And because the transactions were in dollars, the card companies’ fees didn’t apply.

The card giants in the United States didn’t particularly like getting cut out of the deal, so many of them started levying their foreign transaction fee for any purchase that took place outside the country, whether it was in euros or dollars or whatever.

Even if you don’t travel abroad, you may still get hit with the fee elsewhere. After all, if you buy an international plane ticket online from an airline that processes your payment outside the United States, the fee could apply. People who run Web sites and host them outside the United States are also paying. The merchant probably won’t warn you about this ahead of time, either. Instead, you’ll find out when you get the bill.

How do the banks justify charging up to 3 percent total? Representatives for American Express, Bank of America, Chase and Citi weren’t particularly interested in itemizing their costs in detail for me.

One cost they do bear is the expense of fraudulent transactions, which occur more often on charges outside the United States. Fair enough, but how much more often? No one I asked will say.

According to the Nilson Report, a payments industry newsletter, for every $100 in total transaction volume on United States credit cards, about 7 cents ends up being fraudulent. But David Robertson, the publisher, said he did not know how much higher the number would be if it just measured transactions that took place outside the United States.

Would the figure rise to the couple of hundred cents that the banks’ 3 percent fees might suggest? Most industry experts said they thought the costs are nowhere near that high, given that many big international charges come from legitimate companies.

“Is there any particular reason that there is a greater risk associated with the Hilton London than the Hilton Miami?” said Lawrence M. Ausubel, an economics professor at the University of Maryland. How about the Hilton Toronto? It’s completely ridiculous.”

Joe Brancatelli, who runs the joesentme.com site for business travelers and suggested that I take a closer look at these fees following the Credit Card Act, is simply tired of always having to reach into his wallet to cover somebody else’s stealing. “Every time there is a fee involved, they say that you have to accept that there is the potential for fraud here,” he said. “How many times are we going to pay for that?”

The card companies do have other costs related to transactions that take place outside the United States, including a higher volume of calls from confused customers.

Even so, Duncan MacDonald, who was general counsel for Citi’s card business in Europe in North America for part of the 1990s, said he believed that the fees provide a big boost to the issuers’ bottom lines. “My guess is that some major part of it is just pure profit,” he said.

He pointed me toward revealing details in Schwartz vs. Visa, one of the many lawsuits that ultimately led banks to disclose these fees more prominently . The trial judge, Ronald Sabraw, noted that from Feb. 1, 1996, through Dec. 31, 2000, Visa had $6.9 million in multicurrency conversion costs for American cardholders and $630.1 million in currency conversion and related revenue.

Visa and MasterCard “merely act as a clearinghouse, performing arithmetical calculations at insignificant cost,” Judge Sabraw concluded.

There is no law against extraordinary margins. And even at 3 percent, the card companies offer a better deal than currency exchanges.

But if you don’t want to contribute to the card issuers’ bottom lines while you’re on vacation, there is a simple alternative. When you travel outside the United States or make purchases that originate there, use a credit card from Capital One, which charges nothing for the privilege. Or try the Schwab Invest First Visa, which works the same way. Cards from smaller banks or credit unions may have similar policies.

How much money is Capital One leaving on the table? “It’s a real number, and not one I would want out there in the public domain,” said Ryan Schneider, president of the company’s card business. “We made the strategic call that we were pleased to cover the costs for customers because we like that customer segment and we think it will generate customer loyalty.” He added that the company had no plans to add the fee in the next 12 months.

Capital One and Schwab won’t solve all of your problems. You’ll need cash for your trip, too, so call your bank before you leave town and ask what sort of fees you’ll pay at the A.T.M. Some banks may waive some of the fees. Then plan your withdrawals accordingly.

Like many of you, I suspect, I love the rewards I earn on my American Express cards. But when I leave the country, they stay in the back of my wallet. And until all of us shift our spending in protest, it’s hard to imagine the foreign transaction fees will ever fall.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------