RSS
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Inside the Rings: Placing Consistency Above the Big Trick
By JERÉ LONGMAN
Today, 3:27 PM
Unlike the silver medalist, Yevgeny Plushenko, Evan Lysacek, who won gold, did not attempt a quadruple jump on Thursday.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

ARTICLE
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
http://www.nytimes.com/2010/02/20/sports/olympics/20longman.html?partner=rss&emc=rss

VANCOUVER, British Columbia — Evan Lysacek of the United States took the gold medal in Olympic men’s figure skating Thursday, winning an event that was as much a philosophical debate as an athletic contest.

Multimedia
 
Slide Show
Nearly Flawless, Lysacek Skates to Gold
 
Interactive Graphic
In Men’s Figure Skating, Quad Not Needed to Win
Featured Athletes

Evan Lysacek
Figure Skating
United States
EVENTS

Men’s Figure Skating
Gold


Join the discussion with news, analysis and features from the 2010 Winter Games in Vancouver.
Go to the Rings Blog »
“It’s fine to be the best jumper in the world, but does that mean you’re the best figure skater in the world?” Frank Carroll, Lysacek’s coach, said in reference to the complaining of the silver medalist Yevgeny Plushenko of Russia. “It’s not figure jumping; it’s figure skating.”

And yet it was Plushenko, the 2006 Olympic champion, who showed more ambition, if less poise and stamina, in the free skate. He landed a quadruple jump, which requires four rotations in the air, while Lysacek did not attempt one at the biggest moment on skating’s biggest stage.

Plushenko, who returned after a three-year retirement, views skating the way Shaun White views snowboarding: for a sport to grow, the tricks must become more intricate and daring. The quad has been a part of skating since Kurt Browning of Canada first landed one in 1988.

“If the Olympic champion doesn’t know how to jump quad, I don’t know,” a dispirited Plushenko said. “Now it’s not figure skating. Now it’s dancing.”

The men’s free skate here was remindful of the women’s free skate at the 1998 Winter Olympics in Nagano, Japan. Like Michelle Kwan, Lysacek was essentially flawless but also methodical, cautious and mechanical. Only this time there was no Tara Lipinski to snatch the gold medal away.

Small technical differences put Lysacek on the top rung of the medal podium and Plushenko on a slightly lower rung after they received identical artistic scores:

Lysacek made five jumping passes in the second half of his program, gaining a 10 percent bonus for each under the new points-based scoring system, while Plushenko made only three passes.

Plushenko landed his quad heavily, rescuing a triple toe loop but lacking sufficient speed to add a double loop on to a planned three-jump combination.

Lysacek received only a judges’ warning for a wrong-edged takeoff on his triple flip, not a 2- or 3-point deduction that would have changed the outcome, which was narrowly decided in his favor by 257.67 points to 256.36.

Lysacek’s spins were fast and lithe and centered, while Plushenko’s were pedestrian.

Jumping unsteadily, Plushenko twice landed in a tilted position and nearly stepped out of a triple axel. And for all of his reliance on the quad, he attempted only one, not two, as he had a number of times before.

“I kept thinking, When is the second one coming?” said Brian Boitano, the 1988 Olympic champion and the last American men’s gold medalist before Lysacek. “I was really surprised when it didn’t. Plushenko thought one quad would be enough if he skated clean. But it’s not enough just to be clean. You have to be clean and good.”

At the finish of his free skate, with no competitors remaining, Plushenko raised his index fingers to signal that he was No. 1. But his tired body and resigned face suggested that he was No. 2 to Lysacek.

“Evan is such a strong mental skater,” Boitano said. “He has that unspoken quality.”

It was not a classic gold medal performance, merely a sufficient one. Still, there is much to be said for composure in an urgent moment, an entire career compressed to four and a half minutes. An American Olympic champion was desperately needed to provide economic ballast to a sinking sport, Boitano said.

Aleksei Mishin, Plushenko’s coach, did not agree. He called Lysacek, the reigning world champion, a respectable skater, but said that his victory was “nonsense.”

Some journalists and judges have become “Cyclops,” Mishin said, myopically focusing on transitional moves between jumps instead of on the difficulty and innovation of the jumps themselves. It is the equivalent, he insisted, of judging the 100-meter sprint on style instead of speed.

If quadruple jumps carry so little weight, Mishin said, “What’s the difference between men’s singles and women’s singles? Maybe we should combine them into a unisex event.”

It has been a deflating start to the Olympics for Russian figure skating. Its pairs teams failed to win a gold medal for the first time since 1960. And now Russia has only one real chance for a gold medal — in ice dancing.

It may be thin consolation, but there is no small sympathy for Plushenko’s point of view about the quad. Boitano, who always viewed himself as an athletic skater, said, “I agree with him that figure skating needs to progress and get more technical.”

Philippe Candeloro of France, the 1994 and 1998 Olympic bronze medalist, said: “Evan did a very good job; all the jumps were clean. But my problem is, I didn’t see any quad. For me, it could be much better for the ice skating world if Plushenko can win. It would be more respectable. People who like skaters like warriors.”

Yet, Boitano and Candeloro thrived under the old 6-point scoring system. There is a new system in place now, one that values completeness over big tricks. Plushenko did not calibrate his Olympic program accordingly.

“If it was about doing one jump, they would give you 10 seconds and no music” to complete the free skate, Lysacek said. But there are four and a half minutes to fill, not just with jumps, but with connecting steps, turns and spins.

“Many of these boys are supertalented, but they can’t put a whole package from start to finish out there,” Carroll said. “And Evan is a master at that. So many times you’ve seen him skate from the start to the finish and he doesn’t make a mistake. That’s his strength, consistency.”
------------------------------------------------------------------------------